![CHSR Logo](chsr-project-logo.png)

<hr />

**Center for Excellence for Maternal and Infant Health**

**Data Management Information System**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) partnered with the Center
of Excellence for Maternal and Infant Health to design, implement, and
manage a web-based information system for collecting and analyzing
client-level and program-level data from Maternal and Infant Health
Initiative (MIHI) grantees.

The [**[New York State Department of
Health]{.underline}**](http://www.health.ny.gov/) (NYSDOH) established
the Center of Excellence for Maternal and Infant Health at
the [**[University at Rochester Medical
Center]{.underline}**](https://www.urmc.rochester.edu/). The Center of
Excellence was tasked with serving as a resource for the state's
maternal and infant health programs, particularly those programs under
the state's MIHI. The MIHI included two programs: the Maternal and
Infant Community Health Collaborative (MICHC) and the Maternal, Infant
and Early Childhood Home Visiting program (MIECHV). The Center of
Excellence supported MIHI grantees' efforts to implement evidence-based
and/or best practice strategies and evaluate program implementation and
outcomes.

Systems & Software development

CHSR developed the MIHI Data Management Information System to be the
principal source of information for the MIHI, which aimed to improve
maternal and infant health outcomes for high need, Medicaid-eligible
women and families by implementing evidence-based and/or best practice
strategies across the reproductive-life course. This project also
involved the development, implementation, and maintenance of a
longitudinal data file that compiled client-level data from MICHC and
MIECHV.
