![CHSR Logo](chsr-project-logo.png)

<hr />

**Delivery System Reform Incentive Payment Program (DSRIP)**

The [**[University at Albany School of Public
Health]{.underline}**](https://www.albany.edu/sph/indexmain.php) partnered
with the Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) and the University at
Albany Econometrics Research Institute to evaluate the **[[Delivery
System Reform Incentive Payment (DSRIP)
program](https://www.albany.edu/chsr/Publications/2018-final_eval_rpt.pdf).]{.underline}**

New York State received \$6.42 billion from the federal Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services to launch the DSRIP program. DSRIP's
mission was to fundamentally restructure the health care delivery system
by reinvesting in the Medicaid program, with the primary goal of
reducing avoidable hospital use by 25 percent over five years. System
transformations included reforming managed care payments, shifting
payments from fee-for-service to Value Based Payments, and creating
Performing Provider Systems (PPS) that included cooperative partnerships
between different types of health care facilities.

Evaluation & Research

The [**[University at Albany School of Public
Health]{.underline}**](https://www.albany.edu/sph/indexmain.php) partnered
with CHSR and the University at Albany Econometrics Research Institute
to evaluate whether the DSRIP initiatives achieved the desired impact,
effectiveness, and value improvements using a pre-post design. The
evaluation consisted of an implementation study, an analysis of the
comparative effectiveness of different PPSs, and a time series analysis
to determine whether health care service delivery, population health,
and Medicaid costs changed over the study period.

CHSR led the implementation study from 2017 through 2021. Study
activities included conducting surveys, interviews, and focus groups
with DSRIP administrators, providers, and patients. Data collected
include the successes and challenges of PPS planning, implementation,
operation, and program sustainability plans.

Reports

[**Final Interim Evaluation
Report**](https://www.albany.edu/chsr/reports/dsrip_08_2019.pdf)
