![CHSR Logo](chsr-project-logo.png)

<hr />

**New York State Birth Through Five Preschool Development Grant**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) was a grant partner on the
**[[New York State Preschool Development Grant Birth Through
Five](https://www.ccf.ny.gov/council-initiatives/nysb5/nysb5-activities/)]{.underline}**
initiative. The vision of this initiative was for every child in New
York to be supported by a mixed-delivery system informed by parent voice
to provide access to high quality, equitable and comprehensive early
care and learning environments and services essential for healthy
development and lifelong success.

Grant partners included the New York State (NYS) Council of Children and
Families, NYS Early Childhood Advisory Council, the NYS Office of
Children and Family Services, the NYS Department of Health, the NYS
Office of Mental Health, the NYS Office of Temporary and Disability
Assistance, the NYS Education Department, and the New York Early
Childhood Professional Development Institute, City University of New
York.

NEEDS ASSESSMENT

As part of this initiative, CHSR conducted a statewide birth through
five needs assessment, and a subsequent update to this needs assessment,
to better understand the strengths and needs of NYS's mixed delivery
early childhood system. Activities included conducting focus groups with
families and providers (with a focus on vulnerable populations);
administering an electronic survey for families, direct care staff, and
administrators; and reviewing reports, briefings, and published
statistics.

PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

CHSR provided evaluation and feedback to project stakeholders throughout
the project to continuously monitor and improve grant activities. The
goal of evaluation activities was to establish a valid and reliable
system of Continuous Quality Improvement, so that program administrators
could make timely and informed decisions regarding mid-course
corrections or resource allocations.

PYRAMID MODEL

CHSR was tasked with developing, testing, and launching an application
interface to allow New York State Pyramid Model sites to enter and
report on their data. This work included providing ongoing training and
support as additional sites begin to use the application

CHSR also provided further evaluation and feedback to project
stakeholders through data analysis and monitoring activities.

REPORTS

[**Needs Assessment Executive
Summary**](https://www.ccf.ny.gov/files/7515/7746/6633/NAExecutiveSummary.pdf)

**[Needs Assessment
Report](https://www.ccf.ny.gov/files/4915/7773/1159/nysb5_na_report.pdf)**
