![CHSR Logo](chsr-project-logo.png)

<hr />

**Albany County, New York**

**System of Care Evaluation**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) led the
congressionally-mandated, mixed-methods evaluation of the Albany County,
New York system of care.

Albany County received funding from 2004 to 2010 under a grant
initiative from the Center for Mental Health Services (CMHS) of
the [**[Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA)]{.underline}**](http://www.samhsa.gov/) to develop a local
system of care.

The Systems of Care initiative, administered by the Child and Family
Branch of CMHS, was launched in 1993 and was the largest child mental
health services initiative ever funded. Grants were awarded to more than
150 communities to support the development of local systems of care for
children with serious emotional disturbance. A system of care was
conceptualized as a coordinated network of community-based services and
supports organized to meet the challenges of children and youth with
serious mental health needs and their families. The system of care in
Albany County (Families Together in Albany County) was a partnership
between the [**[Albany County Department for Children, Youth, and
Families ]{.underline}**](http://www.albanycounty.com/cyf/)and[**[ Families
Together in New York State, Inc]{.underline}**](http://ftnys.org/).

Evaluation & Research

The evaluation of the Albany County system of care conducted by CHSR was
part of the national evaluation of all system of care communities,
coordinated by [**[ICF Macro]{.underline}**](http://www.icfi.com/),
and [**[Walter R. McDonald
Associates]{.underline}**](http://www.wrma.com/). CHSR completed the
following evaluation components:

-   A **Descriptive Study** that collected demographic characteristics,
    social and functional characteristics, mental health diagnoses, and
    presenting problems on all children/youth entering the system of
    care.

-   A **Longitudinal Child and Family Outcome Study** that used a
    combination of questionnaires and standardized instruments to
    investigate the following at six-month intervals: children's
    emotional and behavioral status, strengths, educational performance,
    criminal justice system involvement, living environments, caregiver
    strain, family functioning, service utilization, and child and
    family satisfaction with services. 

-   Development of **process measures** which were obtained from key
    informant interviews, focus groups, and surveys and which
    supplemented the national evaluation.

Program development

CHSR worked with the community to develop a [**logic
model**](https://www.albany.edu/chsr/Publications/FTACLM.pdf) as an
effective way to bring together diverse groups around a common goal --
to organize their planning, implementation, and evaluation strategies.
This process utilized the Theory of Change to help participants
understand how the underlying assumptions and strategies that guide
local system development are critical to producing changes in services
and supports that are expected to lead to improvements for the community
and its residents.
