![CHSR Logo](chsr-project-logo.png)

<hr />

**21^st^ Century Community Learning Centers**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) conducted an evaluation of
the Albany [**21st Century Community Learning Centers (21st CCLC)
program**](https://www2.ed.gov/programs/21stcclc/index.html), in
accordance with federal and state requirements.

As part of the federally funded 21^st^ CCLC program, the [**New York
State Education Department**](http://www.nysed.gov/) awarded the [**City
School District of Albany**](https://www.albanyschools.org/) a
competitive \$2.7 million grant. The 21st CCLC program was designed to
support the creation or expansion of community learning centers that
served students, particularly those who attend high-poverty or
low-performing schools, and their families. The City School District of
Albany implemented 21st CCLC afterschool and summer programs for K-12
students and their families at six sites. During the school year, each
site offered an hour of academic tutoring daily to participating
students. After tutoring, students engaged in recreational and
enrichment programming aligned with the themes of the high school's four
magnet academies. This enrichment time included activities in areas such
as fine arts and theater, STEM, career readiness, and leadership and
service initiatives. The four elementary sites offered similar
enrichment programming during the summer.

Through participation in these activities, elementary and middle school
students could explore the different themed areas, while high school
students could extend their learning in alignment with the theme of
their chosen academy. The Albany 21st CCLC program also offered
programming for families of students. New York State's Department of
Labor provided on-site assistance to parents searching for employment.
Sites also scheduled regular family activities and created family
resources centers.

Evaluation & Research

The evaluation conducted by CHSR provided comprehensive information on
program implementation and outcomes. The mixed-methods evaluation drew
on multiple sources of data, including student and teacher surveys, site
visits, attendance and disciplinary records, student grades, and
standardized test scores. Specific indicators were developed for the
evaluation based on three long-term project goals:

-   improve academic and behavioral outcomes for students at six target
    schools,

-   expand support for parents' educational and professional
    development, and

-   build and sustain school-based partnerships with local service
    providers.
