![CHSR Logo](chsr-project-logo.png)

<hr />

**Capital Region Child and Adolescent Mobile Team Evaluation**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) conducted an outcome
evaluation and cost-effectiveness study of a mobile team developed
specifically to serve youth in behavioral, psychiatric, or emotional
distress in New York's Capital Region.

The Child and Adolescent Mobile Team (CAMT) was operated by Parsons
Child & Family Center, the largest multi-services agency in New York\'s
Capital Region dedicated to helping families and their children. CAMT
began in 2007 to provide crisis assessment, intervention, and
stabilization services to youth from 4 through 20 years of age residing
in Albany, Rensselaer, and Schenectady Counties. CAMT is distinctive
because of the youth focus of its interventions, and team members'
experience with children and family services as well as crisis
intervention. Intervention by a CAMT is intended to prevent unnecessary
psychiatric hospitalization and facilitate implementation of safety
plans that link children and families to community-based services.

Evaluation & Research

The evaluation study conducted by CHSR included a systematic review of
current research on mobile crisis services. CHSR identified efficacious
model programs and crisis intervention and gauged the extent to which
CAMT practices were consistent with best practices. CHSR analyzed
satisfaction survey data routinely collected by CAMT to identify
possible areas for service delivery enhancement. CAMT's client tracking
system data were merged with data collected by CHSR from a
representative sample of case files. CHSR investigated if interventions
and outcomes differed across the three counties served, or for youth
with different profiles of need and conducted a cost effectiveness
analysis which demonstrated that CAMT is a cost-effective way to prevent
hospitalizations compared to other responders, such as the police or
ambulance services.

Program development

CHSR staff developed a CAMT logic model. The model was then utilized by
managers of CAMT to guide decisions about potential changes to their
data collection items and processes, improving their ability to monitor
key program activities, evaluate client outcomes, and provide on-going
cost-effectiveness estimates. Findings from the evaluation were used by
CAMT staff in applications for funding and awards.
