![CHSR Logo](chsr-project-logo.png)

<hr />

**Healthy Families New York**

Starting in 1995, the Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) worked
with the New York State [**Office of Children and Family
Services**](https://ocfs.ny.gov/) (OCFS) to conduct a variety of studies
of [**[Healthy Families New York
(HFNY)]{.underline}**](http://www.healthyfamiliesnewyork.org/), a
multi-site program designed to prevent child abuse and neglect, increase
parental self-sufficiency, and enhance child health and development.

HFNY was based on Healthy Families America, a national model of home
visiting services delivered in over 400 communities across the United
States.

Evaluation & Research

**Randomized Controlled Trial**: CHSR and OCFS conducted a randomized
controlled trial that began in 2000. Over 1,000 women were interviewed
annually for 3 years. In 2006, additional funding was secured from the
National Institute of Justice and the Doris Duke Foundation to
re-interview families at 7 years to test the long-term effects of the
program. In the study, expectant and new parents were assigned to either
a treatment group (offered home visiting services) or a control group
(received referral information only). The study compared these women and
their children over time to assess program outcomes. In addition to
survey data, an observational study was conducted that involved
videotaping mothers and children to assess the program effects on
parent-child interaction and child development. Noldus, a video-coding
software program, was utilized to analyze the observational data.

**Fatherhood Initiative Study**: Recent research findings emphasized the
importance of fathers in improving the outcomes of children. In
response, HFNY increased efforts to involve fathers and empirically
evaluate the outcomes to add to the dearth of information on empirically
proven methods to foster father involvement and documentation of the
outcomes of fatherhood initiatives. In addition to analyzing data from
the Management Information System (MIS; described below), CHSR
interviewed fatherhood advocates about their work with families and
participated in a variety of HFNY initiatives to promote responsible
fatherhood.

**Early Enrollment Pilot Study**: Based upon the positive outcomes of
HFNY for women who enrolled prenatally, the HFNY Central Administrative
Team, including CHSR, embarked on a pilot study to promote early
enrollment. Five sites were selected to implement a new screening form,
analyze their enrollment processes, and communicate with community
agencies about the benefits of early enrollment. The study demonstrated
varying degrees of success in implementation and outcomes for all the
pilot sites. All sites increased the number of screenings compared to
the number at baseline, and most shortened the length of time from
screening to enrollment. The new simple screening form was well-received
and was a factor for success. Additionally, individual feedback based on
site-specific data on the enrollment process was key to motivating
frontline workers and program leaders in improving practice. Building on
the success of the early enrollment pilot, CHSR continued to work with
additional HFNY sites to study their prenatal enrollment processes.

Program development

**Central Administrative Team:** CHSR is actively participated in an
interdisciplinary team of HFNY program administrators, trainers, and
evaluators. CHSR researchers and MIS staff regularly participated in
statewide HFNY leadership team meetings. These quarterly meetings
provided valuable opportunities to report research findings and discuss
ways to integrate them into program practices.

Systems & Software development

**Management Information System:** CHSR designed and maintained an MIS
installed at 39 HFNY sites. Information was gathered on the mother (or
other primary caregiver), child, father, other household members, and
workers. Data were collected on family demographics, medical events,
pregnancy outcomes, home visits, referrals, developmental screenings,
parental stress, training, educational attainment, and employment.
Performance measures monitored attainment toward program goals. In
addition to providing evaluation data, the system included capabilities
for producing on-site statistical reports to assist in program
monitoring, administration, and management of cases. CHSR offered
on-site training, telephone and email support, special report requests,
and regular statewide training sessions. CHSR also designed and
maintained the statewide HFNY website.
