![CHSR Logo](chsr-project-logo.png)

<hr />

**CPS/DV Co-location Evaluation**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR), contracted by the New
York State [**[Office of Children and Family Services
(OCFS)]{.underline}**](http://www.ocfs.state.ny.us/main/), evaluated a
collaborative approach for serving families experiencing both intimate
partner violence and child maltreatment.

Traditionally, child protective services (CPS) and domestic violence
(DV) service areas functioned separately. However, many times they
served the same families. It is estimated that 30-60% of families
involved in CPS also experienced intimate partner violence. An emerging
approach, involving co-location of DV agency staff with CPS staff, was
thought to have benefits for the families involved with both systems.
Formal evaluation of this collaborative approach were sparse. Using a
mixed method design, this study systematically examined outcomes of
families served by co-located CPS and DV staff. Gaining an understanding
of these collaborative services and their impact on children and
families offered a way to structure and fund future services.

Evaluation & Research

CHSR utilized mixed methods to evaluate collaborative practices and
outcomes for families. Methods include telephone interviews with all
counties' Directors of Services, focus groups with caseworkers and
supervisors, face-to-face interviews with DV staff, a statewide online
survey, case records review, and surveys of clients. Three counties
without CPS/DV collaborations were selected for comparison and analysis
alongside three counties engaged in collaborative initiatives.

Program development

As part of this study, CHSR worked with OCFS to develop a logic model
that specified the program components and described the evaluation plan
and types of data that would be collected. The co-location[ **[logic
model]{.underline}** ](https://www.albany.edu/chsr/Publications/FINAL%20CPS%20DV%20Program%20Logic%20Model.pdf)systematically
and visually represented how program activities were linked to the
expected results of the initiative.
