![CHSR Logo](chsr-project-logo.png)

<hr />

**New York State Birth Through Five Preschool Development Grant**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) was a grant partner on the
**[[New York State Preschool Development Grant Birth Through
Five](https://www.ccf.ny.gov/council-initiatives/nysb5/nysb5-activities/)]{.underline}**
initiative. The vision of this initiative was for every child in New
York to be supported by a mixed-delivery system informed by parent voice
to provide access to high quality, equitable and comprehensive early
care and learning environments and services essential for healthy
development and lifelong success.

Grant partners included the New York State (NYS) Council of Children and
Families, NYS Early Childhood Advisory Council, the NYS Office of
Children and Family Services, the NYS Department of Health, the NYS
Office of Mental Health, the NYS Office of Temporary and Disability
Assistance, the NYS Education Department, and the New York Early
Childhood Professional Development Institute, City University of New
York.

NEEDS ASSESSMENT

As part of this initiative, CHSR conducted a statewide birth through
five needs assessment, and a subsequent update to this needs assessment,
to better understand the strengths and needs of NYS's mixed delivery
early childhood system. Activities included conducting focus groups with
families and providers (with a focus on vulnerable populations);
administering an electronic survey for families, direct care staff, and
administrators; and reviewing reports, briefings, and published
statistics.

PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

CHSR provided evaluation and feedback to project stakeholders throughout
the project to continuously monitor and improve grant activities. The
goal of evaluation activities was to establish a valid and reliable
system of Continuous Quality Improvement, so that program administrators
could make timely and informed decisions regarding mid-course
corrections or resource allocations.

PYRAMID MODEL

CHSR was tasked with developing, testing, and launching an application
interface to allow New York State Pyramid Model sites to enter and
report on their data. This work included providing ongoing training and
support as additional sites begin to use the application

CHSR also provided further evaluation and feedback to project
stakeholders through data analysis and monitoring activities.

REPORTS

[**Needs Assessment Executive
Summary**](https://www.ccf.ny.gov/files/7515/7746/6633/NAExecutiveSummary.pdf)

**[Needs Assessment
Report](https://www.ccf.ny.gov/files/4915/7773/1159/nysb5_na_report.pdf)**

**\
**

**21^st^ Century Community Learning Centers**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) conducted an evaluation of
the Albany [**21st Century Community Learning Centers (21st CCLC)
program**](https://www2.ed.gov/programs/21stcclc/index.html), in
accordance with federal and state requirements.

As part of the federally funded 21^st^ CCLC program, the [**New York
State Education Department**](http://www.nysed.gov/) awarded the [**City
School District of Albany**](https://www.albanyschools.org/) a
competitive \$2.7 million grant. The 21st CCLC program was designed to
support the creation or expansion of community learning centers that
served students, particularly those who attend high-poverty or
low-performing schools, and their families. The City School District of
Albany implemented 21st CCLC afterschool and summer programs for K-12
students and their families at six sites. During the school year, each
site offered an hour of academic tutoring daily to participating
students. After tutoring, students engaged in recreational and
enrichment programming aligned with the themes of the high school's four
magnet academies. This enrichment time included activities in areas such
as fine arts and theater, STEM, career readiness, and leadership and
service initiatives. The four elementary sites offered similar
enrichment programming during the summer.

Through participation in these activities, elementary and middle school
students could explore the different themed areas, while high school
students could extend their learning in alignment with the theme of
their chosen academy. The Albany 21st CCLC program also offered
programming for families of students. New York State's Department of
Labor provided on-site assistance to parents searching for employment.
Sites also scheduled regular family activities and created family
resources centers.

Evaluation & Research

The evaluation conducted by CHSR provided comprehensive information on
program implementation and outcomes. The mixed-methods evaluation drew
on multiple sources of data, including student and teacher surveys, site
visits, attendance and disciplinary records, student grades, and
standardized test scores. Specific indicators were developed for the
evaluation based on three long-term project goals:

-   improve academic and behavioral outcomes for students at six target
    schools,

-   expand support for parents' educational and professional
    development, and

-   build and sustain school-based partnerships with local service
    providers.

**Albany School Improvement Grant Program Evaluation**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) was contracted to evaluate
the Albany School Improvement Grant (SIG) initiative which aimed to
support school improvement efforts at Focus and Priority Schools in the
[**City School District of Albany**](https://www.albanyschools.org/).

Evaluation & Research

The evaluation CHSR conducted of SIG consisted of a process and outcome
study. The process study focused on examining program practices,
including how programs operate, who is served, what services are
provided, and barriers to implementation. The outcome evaluation
examined whether programs were meeting desired goals and measurable
outcomes. The evaluation analyzed data from records maintained by
SIG-supported programs and data entered into Power School and the
Violent and Disruptive Incident Report (VADIR) database. These data were
used to address questions related to characteristics of participating
students, such as demographics, grades, scores on assessments, student
behavior, and the frequency, intensity, and duration of program
participation.

Other data collection strategies, including teacher, parent, and student
surveys, were utilized as appropriate. CHSR provided data support,
aiming to assist program administrators in defining concrete goals and
collecting appropriately targeted program measures. CHSR also analyzed
ongoing district surveys (lottery survey, YRBS, etc.) to measure program
effects and inform program development.

**My Brother's Keeper**

CHSR worked with [**[City School District of
Albany]{.underline}**](http://www.albanyschools.org/) to evaluate a My
Brother's Keeper Challenge Grant (MBKCG) awarded to the school district
which aimed to prioritize initiatives designed to ensure young boys of
color entered school ready to learn, read at grade level by third grade,
and grew up in safe communities.

This grant was designed to encourage regions and school districts to
develop and execute coherent cradle-to-career college strategies that
aimed at improving the life outcomes for boys and young men of color.

MBKCGs were part of a federal, interagency effort implemented by
President Obama that focused on closing and eliminating the opportunity
gaps faced by boys and young men of color to give all young people the
chance to reach their full potential.

Evaluation & Research

CHSR worked with Albany schools to identify performance measures to
track both implementation fidelity and outcomes of the MBKCG initiative.
The evaluation assessed literacy achievement for students in
prekindergarten through grade 3, tracked the achievement gap between
students of color and their peers, and examined frequency and outcomes
of Code of Conduct violations in Priority Schools.

**Albanyt City School District:**

**Data Capacity and Program Evaluation**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) provided program
evaluation and data support services to the [**[City School District of
Albany (CSDA)]{.underline}**.](https://www.albanyschools.org/)

Evaluation & Research

CHSR provided program evaluation and data support services to The City
School District of Albany. Work focused on building district capacity to
design and implement rigorous data protocols; engage in objective,
contextually sensitive interpretation of findings; and deliver
accessible, relevant data presentations to a variety of stakeholders.
Activities included:

-   define and monitor data collection procedures for appropriateness
    and rigor;

-   monitoring a comprehensive data analysis plan aligned at the
    district and building levels;

-   longitudinal tracking of individual student outcomes including
    kindergarten readiness, state test scores, NWEA scores, grades,
    Regents exam scores, PSAT/SAT scores, school attendance,
    Out-of-School Time program attendance, enrollment stability, VADIR
    involvement, college enrollment, and college retention;

-   monitoring District Comprehensive Improvement Plan (DCIP) and School
    Comprehensive Education Plan (SCEP) indicators;

-   support development of future DCIP and SCEPs;

-   track indicators for demonstrable improvement in schools under
    Receivership; and

-   advise on integration of data into the district improvement process
    to support data-driven decision-making.

**E-MDT Initiative Preliminary Evaluation**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR), in collaboration with the
University at Albany School of Social Welfare, partnered
with [**[Lifespan of Greater
Rochester]{.underline}**](https://www.lifespan-roch.org/enhanced-multidisciplinary-teams) and
the [**[Weill Cornell Medicine's New York City Elder Abuse
Center]{.underline}**](https://nyceac.org/clinical-services/mdts/) to
perform a preliminary program evaluation of the Elder Abuse
Interventions and Enhanced Multidisciplinary Team (E-MDT) Initiative in
New York State. The preliminary program evaluation was funded by the New
York State [**Office for Aging**](https://aging.ny.gov/) and the New
York State [**Office of Victim Services**](https://ovs.ny.gov/).

E-MDTs used a collaborative approach to intervene in complex cases of
elder abuse (e.g., financial, physical, psychological, sexual, and
neglect by others). Members of the teams represented a variety of
disciplines including Adult Protective Services, aging services, health
and human services, financial/banking services, law enforcement, and
others who meet under the facilitation of an E-MDT Coordinator. The
teams were enhanced by access to forensic accountants, geriatric
psychiatrists/mental health professionals, and civil legal services.

Evaluation & Research

In Year 1, CHSR established a baseline efficacy of the program in New
York State through interviews and surveys with representatives in a
variety of roles within the E-MDTs. In subsequent projects years, CHSR
provided additional support for program efficacy through an additional
survey and focus groups targeting E-MDT ancillary staff.

**Healthy Families New Jersey**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) developed a customized
web-based application for [**[Healthy Families New Jersey
(HFNJ)]{.underline}**](http://www.healthyfamiliesnj.org/).

HFNJ is based on the Healthy Families America model, a research-based,
nationally accredited home visitation program designed to promote
positive childhood outcomes and family functioning. In 2008, New Jersey
merged its Healthy Families Program (HF) with the TANF Initiative for
Parents (TIP) Program, thereby making the Healthy Families
research-based model available to TANF recipients. There are 22 Healthy
Families‐TIP (HF‐TIP) Programs throughout the state of New Jersey.

Evaluation & Research

CHSR worked collaboratively with Prevent Child Abuse New Jersey to
revise the Program Information Management System (PIMS) data collection
system for the new web-based application. CHSR programmed the
application, which required converting data from the old system to the
new system, and also trained users and provided technical support. The
new system was designed to meet the administrative, programmatic,
reporting, and evaluation needs of HF-TIP. The web-based system allowed
managers and workers to analyze and advance practice through
comprehensive data collection capacity and sophisticated reporting
mechanisms.

**Healthy Families New York**

Starting in 1995, the Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) worked
with the New York State [**Office of Children and Family
Services**](https://ocfs.ny.gov/) (OCFS) to conduct a variety of studies
of [**[Healthy Families New York
(HFNY)]{.underline}**](http://www.healthyfamiliesnewyork.org/), a
multi-site program designed to prevent child abuse and neglect, increase
parental self-sufficiency, and enhance child health and development.

HFNY was based on Healthy Families America, a national model of home
visiting services delivered in over 400 communities across the United
States.

Evaluation & Research

**Randomized Controlled Trial**: CHSR and OCFS conducted a randomized
controlled trial that began in 2000. Over 1,000 women were interviewed
annually for 3 years. In 2006, additional funding was secured from the
National Institute of Justice and the Doris Duke Foundation to
re-interview families at 7 years to test the long-term effects of the
program. In the study, expectant and new parents were assigned to either
a treatment group (offered home visiting services) or a control group
(received referral information only). The study compared these women and
their children over time to assess program outcomes. In addition to
survey data, an observational study was conducted that involved
videotaping mothers and children to assess the program effects on
parent-child interaction and child development. Noldus, a video-coding
software program, was utilized to analyze the observational data.

**Fatherhood Initiative Study**: Recent research findings emphasized the
importance of fathers in improving the outcomes of children. In
response, HFNY increased efforts to involve fathers and empirically
evaluate the outcomes to add to the dearth of information on empirically
proven methods to foster father involvement and documentation of the
outcomes of fatherhood initiatives. In addition to analyzing data from
the Management Information System (MIS; described below), CHSR
interviewed fatherhood advocates about their work with families and
participated in a variety of HFNY initiatives to promote responsible
fatherhood.

**Early Enrollment Pilot Study**: Based upon the positive outcomes of
HFNY for women who enrolled prenatally, the HFNY Central Administrative
Team, including CHSR, embarked on a pilot study to promote early
enrollment. Five sites were selected to implement a new screening form,
analyze their enrollment processes, and communicate with community
agencies about the benefits of early enrollment. The study demonstrated
varying degrees of success in implementation and outcomes for all the
pilot sites. All sites increased the number of screenings compared to
the number at baseline, and most shortened the length of time from
screening to enrollment. The new simple screening form was well-received
and was a factor for success. Additionally, individual feedback based on
site-specific data on the enrollment process was key to motivating
frontline workers and program leaders in improving practice. Building on
the success of the early enrollment pilot, CHSR continued to work with
additional HFNY sites to study their prenatal enrollment processes.

Program development

**Central Administrative Team:** CHSR is actively participated in an
interdisciplinary team of HFNY program administrators, trainers, and
evaluators. CHSR researchers and MIS staff regularly participated in
statewide HFNY leadership team meetings. These quarterly meetings
provided valuable opportunities to report research findings and discuss
ways to integrate them into program practices.

Systems & Software development

**Management Information System:** CHSR designed and maintained an MIS
installed at 39 HFNY sites. Information was gathered on the mother (or
other primary caregiver), child, father, other household members, and
workers. Data were collected on family demographics, medical events,
pregnancy outcomes, home visits, referrals, developmental screenings,
parental stress, training, educational attainment, and employment.
Performance measures monitored attainment toward program goals. In
addition to providing evaluation data, the system included capabilities
for producing on-site statistical reports to assist in program
monitoring, administration, and management of cases. CHSR offered
on-site training, telephone and email support, special report requests,
and regular statewide training sessions. CHSR also designed and
maintained the statewide HFNY website.

**Kinship Navigator**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) received a grant from
the [**[New York State Kinship
Navigator]{.underline}**](http://www.nysnavigator.org/) program to
evaluate multiple interventions for kinship caregivers (e.g.,
grandparent, relative, or fictive kin caregivers).

Both interventions focused on fostering family stability, safety,
well-being, and permanency for youth in kinship care. One intervention
provided case management and referral services through a warmline. The
other provided local case management and peer-to-peer support group
services.

Evaluation & Research

The study performed by CHSR included a formative evaluation, which will
examine program operations, data collection capacity, and options for
drawing a comparison group. A process evaluation was then conducted to
determine the extent to which services are being delivered as designed,
and to develop knowledge about implementation that can foster future
replication. The process evaluation assessed if and how the
interventions changed child welfare practice; how various kinship
stakeholders collaborate; and factors that facilitated or impeded
successful implementation. Finally, an outcome evaluation was conducted
to assess program impacts on key child and caregiver outcomes, including
child well-being, caregiver well-being, family stress, and child
permanency.

**The National Youth in Transition Database (NYTD)**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) collaborated with the New
York State **[[Office of Children and Family
Services](http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/cb/research-data-technology/reporting-systems/nytd)
(OCFS)]{.underline}** to track and interview youth transitioning out of
foster care in accordance with the congressionally-mandated,
country-wide [**[National Youth in Transition Database
(NYTD)]{.underline}**](http://www.acf.hhs.gov/programs/cb/research-data-technology/reporting-systems/nytd)
initiative.

Evaluation & Research

For the project, CHSR collected information on youth in foster care and
their outcomes as they transitioned out of foster care. The survey
focused on employment, education, financial resources, and family
relationships. CHSR tracked and surveyed these youth at ages 17, 19, and
21 years old.

The project required close communication with regional, district, and
voluntary agency casework and administrative staff to obtain youth data,
as well as ongoing contact with youth to maintain current contact
information. Surveys are administered via phone, web, and paper
surveying techniques and data files are regularly submitted to OCFS for
federal submission and approval.

**New York State Family Resource Centers**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) partnered with the New
York State [**[Office of Children and Family
Services]{.underline}**](http://www.ocfs.state.ny.us/main/) to gather
data to support the activities and services of Family Resource Centers
(FRCs) located throughout New York State.

FRCs offered voluntary services and support for families in their
communities, with an emphasis on families with young children. They were
diverse in their program offerings and populations served, but all
promoted the strengthening of families through developing social
support, increasing knowledge of effective parenting, fostering child
development, and enhancing family functioning. Services included parent
education classes and workshops, playgroups, information and referral
services, family social and recreational programs, supervised
visitation, adult education (e.g., job readiness, English as a Second
Language programs), counseling, home visiting, early childhood
education, and concrete services (e.g., food and clothing).

Evaluation & Research

CHSR undertook a number of studies to examine the implementation and
outcomes of the FRCs:

-   an **Outcome Study** that assessed the effectiveness of FRCs in
    enhancing parenting behaviors and attitudes and increasing social
    support;

-   a **Community Study** examined the connections between FRCs and
    their communities. These connections were investigated through
    interviews with people at other organizations that provided services
    to the same target population of children and families;

-   a **Dosage Analysis** explored patterns of program attendance and
    retention based on participant demographics and site
    characteristics;

-   a **Protective Factors Survey** was administered to FRC participants
    at regular intervals. CHSR helped develop the survey to provide
    ongoing information about participants' family functioning, social
    support, concrete support, nurturing and attachment, and knowledge
    of child development. CHSR analyzed the data periodically; and

-   a **Satisfaction Survey** developed for FRCs to use to assess
    participants' experience of [**[The Incredible
    Years]{.underline}**](http://www.incredibleyears.com/) parent
    education curriculum.

Systems & Software development

CHSR developed a web-based database application for FRCs to assist in
monitoring activities, tracking participation, administrating programs,
and measuring outcomes.

**CPS/DV Co-location Evaluation**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR), contracted by the New
York State [**[Office of Children and Family Services
(OCFS)]{.underline}**](http://www.ocfs.state.ny.us/main/), evaluated a
collaborative approach for serving families experiencing both intimate
partner violence and child maltreatment.

Traditionally, child protective services (CPS) and domestic violence
(DV) service areas functioned separately. However, many times they
served the same families. It is estimated that 30-60% of families
involved in CPS also experienced intimate partner violence. An emerging
approach, involving co-location of DV agency staff with CPS staff, was
thought to have benefits for the families involved with both systems.
Formal evaluation of this collaborative approach were sparse. Using a
mixed method design, this study systematically examined outcomes of
families served by co-located CPS and DV staff. Gaining an understanding
of these collaborative services and their impact on children and
families offered a way to structure and fund future services.

Evaluation & Research

CHSR utilized mixed methods to evaluate collaborative practices and
outcomes for families. Methods include telephone interviews with all
counties' Directors of Services, focus groups with caseworkers and
supervisors, face-to-face interviews with DV staff, a statewide online
survey, case records review, and surveys of clients. Three counties
without CPS/DV collaborations were selected for comparison and analysis
alongside three counties engaged in collaborative initiatives.

Program development

As part of this study, CHSR worked with OCFS to develop a logic model
that specified the program components and described the evaluation plan
and types of data that would be collected. The co-location[ **[logic
model]{.underline}** ](https://www.albany.edu/chsr/Publications/FINAL%20CPS%20DV%20Program%20Logic%20Model.pdf)systematically
and visually represented how program activities were linked to the
expected results of the initiative.

**Adolescent Pregnancy & Prevention Services**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR), in collaboration with the
New York State **[[Office of Children and Family
Services](http://www.ocfs.state.ny.us/main/),]{.underline}** developed a
customized web-based application for the Adolescent Pregnancy and
Prevention Services (APPS) program.

The APPS program was developed to provide a comprehensive array of
services to at-risk, pregnant, and parenting adolescents through 21
years of age. The program was designed to address four outcomes
statewide: adolescent pregnancy prevention, coordination/community
awareness, self-sufficiency, and healthy child development.

Systems & Software development

CHSR transitioned the APPS database from a site-specific Access database
to a statewide web-based application. CHSR programmed the application,
converted data from the old system to the new system, trained users, and
provided technical support. The new system met administrative,
programmatic, reporting, and evaluation needs. The web-based system
allowed managers and workers to analyze and advance practice through its
comprehensive data collection capacity and sophisticated reporting
mechanisms. It also allowed individual sites to see their progress
towards their annual performance and contractual targets.

**Albany County Human Services Department Evaluation**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) conducted an evaluation of
six human service departments within Albany County: [**[Department of
Social
Services]{.underline}**](http://www.albanycounty.com/Government/Departments/DepartmentofSocialServices.aspx), [**[Department
of
Probation]{.underline}**](http://www.albanycounty.com/Government/Departments/DepartmentofProbation.aspx), [**[Department
of
Health]{.underline}**](http://www.albanycounty.com/Government/Departments/DepartmentofHealth.aspx), [**[Department
of Mental
Health]{.underline}**](http://www.albanycounty.com/Government/Departments/DepartmentofMentalHealth.aspx), [**[Department
for
Aging]{.underline}**](http://www.albanycounty.com/Government/Departments/DepartmentForAging.aspx),
and [**[Department for Children, Youth, and
Families]{.underline}**](http://www.albanycounty.com/Government/Departments/DepartmentforChildrenYouthandFamilies.aspx).

Evaluation & Research

The evaluation conducted by CHSR aimed to provide county leadership with
an assessment of the operations of six county-level human services
departments. Utilizing a comprehensive document review, interviews with
departmental leaders, and a staff survey, CHSR developed an
organizational structure of each department, logic models to outline
departmental goals and objectives, and benchmark measures to assist
departments in monitoring outcomes on a yearly basis. Additionally, the
evaluation gathered data and feedback regarding each department's
engagement in activities designed to increase equity among the residents
of Albany County. This data was to be used by the county to develop a
strategic plan related to a county-wide equity agenda.

**Delivery System Reform Incentive Payment Program (DSRIP)**

The [**[University at Albany School of Public
Health]{.underline}**](https://www.albany.edu/sph/indexmain.php) partnered
with the Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) and the University at
Albany Econometrics Research Institute to evaluate the **[[Delivery
System Reform Incentive Payment (DSRIP)
program](https://www.albany.edu/chsr/Publications/2018-final_eval_rpt.pdf).]{.underline}**

New York State received \$6.42 billion from the federal Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services to launch the DSRIP program. DSRIP's
mission was to fundamentally restructure the health care delivery system
by reinvesting in the Medicaid program, with the primary goal of
reducing avoidable hospital use by 25 percent over five years. System
transformations included reforming managed care payments, shifting
payments from fee-for-service to Value Based Payments, and creating
Performing Provider Systems (PPS) that included cooperative partnerships
between different types of health care facilities.

Evaluation & Research

The [**[University at Albany School of Public
Health]{.underline}**](https://www.albany.edu/sph/indexmain.php) partnered
with CHSR and the University at Albany Econometrics Research Institute
to evaluate whether the DSRIP initiatives achieved the desired impact,
effectiveness, and value improvements using a pre-post design. The
evaluation consisted of an implementation study, an analysis of the
comparative effectiveness of different PPSs, and a time series analysis
to determine whether health care service delivery, population health,
and Medicaid costs changed over the study period.

CHSR led the implementation study from 2017 through 2021. Study
activities included conducting surveys, interviews, and focus groups
with DSRIP administrators, providers, and patients. Data collected
include the successes and challenges of PPS planning, implementation,
operation, and program sustainability plans.

Reports

[**Final Interim Evaluation
Report**](https://www.albany.edu/chsr/reports/dsrip_08_2019.pdf)

**\
**

**Greater Rochester Opioid Prevention**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) was awarded a grant
by [**[The Greater Rochester Health
Foundation ]{.underline}**](http://www.thegrhf.org/)to conduct an
evaluation to assess the implementation, impact, and effectiveness of an
opioid prevention project in Genesee, Orleans, and Wyoming counties.

The Greater Rochester Health Foundation (GRHF) funded a collaborative
program implemented and managed by the [**[Genesee/Orleans Council on
Alcoholism and Substance Abuse
(GCASA)]{.underline}**](https://gcasa.net/) to improve follow up
services for people who use opioids after overdose or other medical
emergency.

Evaluation & Research

CHSR led a collaborative team including the Center for Addictions
Research and an Albany Medical Center physician-research focused on
evaluating and reporting the impact and effectiveness of this prevention
program. The evaluation included a mixed methods process study and
outcomes study that utilized both qualitative and quantitative data.

**Assessment of Health Services for**

**Veterans in Rural Upstate New York**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) worked with
the [**[Veterans Administration (VA) Health Care Upstate New
York ]{.underline}**](http://www.visn2.va.gov/)to identify potential
non-VA collaborators and models of care that were in place or could be
implemented to improve access to services for veterans in rural areas of
the state.

The Veterans Integrated Service Network (VISN) of upstate New York,
included six medical centers (located in Albany, Batavia, Bath, Buffalo,
Canandaigua, and Syracuse) and 29 community based outpatient clinics
(CBOC\'s) in 49 counties.

Evaluation & Research

CHSR conducted a review of extant research on evidence-based models of
care for improving health service delivery in rural areas. The review
informed the development of an online survey for all medical center
directors and community-based outpatient clinic managers. The survey
provided a baseline assessment of current rural community collaborations
and referral practices and identified perceived barriers to and benefits
of collaborations with non-VA providers.

**Center for Excellence for Maternal and Infant Health**

**Data Management Information System**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) partnered with the Center
of Excellence for Maternal and Infant Health to design, implement, and
manage a web-based information system for collecting and analyzing
client-level and program-level data from Maternal and Infant Health
Initiative (MIHI) grantees.

The [**[New York State Department of
Health]{.underline}**](http://www.health.ny.gov/) (NYSDOH) established
the Center of Excellence for Maternal and Infant Health at
the [**[University at Rochester Medical
Center]{.underline}**](https://www.urmc.rochester.edu/). The Center of
Excellence was tasked with serving as a resource for the state's
maternal and infant health programs, particularly those programs under
the state's MIHI. The MIHI included two programs: the Maternal and
Infant Community Health Collaborative (MICHC) and the Maternal, Infant
and Early Childhood Home Visiting program (MIECHV). The Center of
Excellence supported MIHI grantees' efforts to implement evidence-based
and/or best practice strategies and evaluate program implementation and
outcomes.

Systems & Software development

CHSR developed the MIHI Data Management Information System to be the
principal source of information for the MIHI, which aimed to improve
maternal and infant health outcomes for high need, Medicaid-eligible
women and families by implementing evidence-based and/or best practice
strategies across the reproductive-life course. This project also
involved the development, implementation, and maintenance of a
longitudinal data file that compiled client-level data from MICHC and
MIECHV.

**ECHO Collaborative**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) performed an early
evaluation of the end+disparities **[[ECHO
Collaborative](https://targethiv.org/cqii/end-disparities-echo-collaborative)]{.underline}**
to assess implementation of the initiative and early results of
participation on organizational improvement.

The end+disparities ECHO Collaborative, led by the [**Health Resources
and Services Administration (HRSA)**](https://ryanwhite.hrsa.gov/) Ryan
White HIV/AIDS Program and New York State Department of Health's AIDS
Institute, aimed to reduce disparities in HIV patient outcomes and
treatment by training participating organization in continuous quality
improvement (CQI) practices and supporting the development of a peer
network of providers.

Evaluation & Research

The evaluation conducted by CHSR included secondary data review;
in-depth interviews with a sample of organizations; and a survey of all
involved partners regarding current level of involvement, first
successes and challenges to CQI project implementation, and utilization
of the peer network. This work gave Collaborative leadership early
insight as to whether the program is starting to achieve the desired
impact on patient outcomes and identified common routes to these
results, in addition to identifying groups that may need more support to
make expected progress, thereby informing the second half of the
initiative's efforts.

Reports

**[ECHO Collaborative
Project](https://www.albany.edu/chsr/Publications/ECHO%20Collaborative%20project.pdf)**

**\
**

**OPWDD Direct Care Employee Trust Survey**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) worked with the New York
State [**Office for People with Developmental Disabilities
(OPWDD)**](https://opwdd.ny.gov/) to examine the challenges faced by
direct care employees working with people with developmental
disabilities. This research specifically focused on state-run services,
which comprised approximately 20 percent of all services provided.

OPWDD coordinated services for more than 126,000 New Yorkers with
developmental disabilities by providing services both directly and
through a network of approximately 700 non-profit service providers
throughout the state.

Evaluation & Research

CHSR conducted a mail and web-based worker survey and a series of worker
focus groups to obtain insights and perceptions of direct care staff.
Both methods focused on employee skills and support in dealing with
safety issues facing their clients.

**Addressing the Needs of Victims of**

**Domestic Violence in Housing Programs**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) collaborated with
**[[Unity
House]{.underline}](https://www.unityhouseny.org/), [[Equinox]{.underline}](https://www.equinoxinc.org/)**,
and the **[[YWCA of Northeastern New
York](http://www.ywca-neny.org/)]{.underline}** on a project, funded by
the New York State [**Office of Victim Services**](https://ovs.ny.gov/),
which was developed to address the critical behavioral health needs
experienced by victims of domestic violence residing in domestic
violence housing. The project focused on expanding access to
low-barrier, voluntary behavioral health services for victims of
domestic violence residing in domestic violence housing programs by
hiring co-located and/or mobile licensed mental health professionals.

Evaluation & Research

The evaluation conducted by CHSR consisted of three principal
components:

-   a **Needs Assessment** to examine each agency's current services,
    further identify contextually-relevant practice gaps, and
    triangulate stakeholder perspectives regarding needs and barriers;

-   an **Implementation Evaluation** to determine the extent to which
    the project is being implemented as designed, and to identify
    factors that are facilitating or impeding successful implementation;
    and

-   an **Outcome Evaluation** focused on assessing changes in staff
    behavior, housing and service delivery, and agency practice that
    have resulted from the project.

**\
**

**Partnership for Success**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) was contracted by the
[**[South Glens Falls Community Coalition for Family Wellness
(CCFW)]{.underline}**](http://preventioncouncil.org/family-wellness-coalition/) 
to conduct data collection and analysis for the Strategic Prevention
Framework [**[Partnership for Success
(PFS)]{.underline}**](http://raisaratoga.org/news/3381961) grant which
focused on prescription opiate and heroin abuse prevention and opiate
overdose prevention among youth aged 12-25 in the local community.

Evaluation & Research

CHSR conducted surveys and focus groups, obtained archival data, and
conducted data analysis in concert with the project staff at CCFW.

**Albany County, New York**

**System of Care Evaluation**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) led the
congressionally-mandated, mixed-methods evaluation of the Albany County,
New York system of care.

Albany County received funding from 2004 to 2010 under a grant
initiative from the Center for Mental Health Services (CMHS) of
the [**[Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA)]{.underline}**](http://www.samhsa.gov/) to develop a local
system of care.

The Systems of Care initiative, administered by the Child and Family
Branch of CMHS, was launched in 1993 and was the largest child mental
health services initiative ever funded. Grants were awarded to more than
150 communities to support the development of local systems of care for
children with serious emotional disturbance. A system of care was
conceptualized as a coordinated network of community-based services and
supports organized to meet the challenges of children and youth with
serious mental health needs and their families. The system of care in
Albany County (Families Together in Albany County) was a partnership
between the [**[Albany County Department for Children, Youth, and
Families ]{.underline}**](http://www.albanycounty.com/cyf/)and[**[ Families
Together in New York State, Inc]{.underline}**](http://ftnys.org/).

Evaluation & Research

The evaluation of the Albany County system of care conducted by CHSR was
part of the national evaluation of all system of care communities,
coordinated by [**[ICF Macro]{.underline}**](http://www.icfi.com/),
and [**[Walter R. McDonald
Associates]{.underline}**](http://www.wrma.com/). CHSR completed the
following evaluation components:

-   A **Descriptive Study** that collected demographic characteristics,
    social and functional characteristics, mental health diagnoses, and
    presenting problems on all children/youth entering the system of
    care.

-   A **Longitudinal Child and Family Outcome Study** that used a
    combination of questionnaires and standardized instruments to
    investigate the following at six-month intervals: children's
    emotional and behavioral status, strengths, educational performance,
    criminal justice system involvement, living environments, caregiver
    strain, family functioning, service utilization, and child and
    family satisfaction with services. 

-   Development of **process measures** which were obtained from key
    informant interviews, focus groups, and surveys and which
    supplemented the national evaluation.

Program development

CHSR worked with the community to develop a [**logic
model**](https://www.albany.edu/chsr/Publications/FTACLM.pdf) as an
effective way to bring together diverse groups around a common goal --
to organize their planning, implementation, and evaluation strategies.
This process utilized the Theory of Change to help participants
understand how the underlying assumptions and strategies that guide
local system development are critical to producing changes in services
and supports that are expected to lead to improvements for the community
and its residents.

**Capital Region Child and Adolescent Mobile Team Evaluation**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) conducted an outcome
evaluation and cost-effectiveness study of a mobile team developed
specifically to serve youth in behavioral, psychiatric, or emotional
distress in New York's Capital Region.

The Child and Adolescent Mobile Team (CAMT) was operated by Parsons
Child & Family Center, the largest multi-services agency in New York\'s
Capital Region dedicated to helping families and their children. CAMT
began in 2007 to provide crisis assessment, intervention, and
stabilization services to youth from 4 through 20 years of age residing
in Albany, Rensselaer, and Schenectady Counties. CAMT is distinctive
because of the youth focus of its interventions, and team members'
experience with children and family services as well as crisis
intervention. Intervention by a CAMT is intended to prevent unnecessary
psychiatric hospitalization and facilitate implementation of safety
plans that link children and families to community-based services.

Evaluation & Research

The evaluation study conducted by CHSR included a systematic review of
current research on mobile crisis services. CHSR identified efficacious
model programs and crisis intervention and gauged the extent to which
CAMT practices were consistent with best practices. CHSR analyzed
satisfaction survey data routinely collected by CAMT to identify
possible areas for service delivery enhancement. CAMT's client tracking
system data were merged with data collected by CHSR from a
representative sample of case files. CHSR investigated if interventions
and outcomes differed across the three counties served, or for youth
with different profiles of need and conducted a cost effectiveness
analysis which demonstrated that CAMT is a cost-effective way to prevent
hospitalizations compared to other responders, such as the police or
ambulance services.

Program development

CHSR staff developed a CAMT logic model. The model was then utilized by
managers of CAMT to guide decisions about potential changes to their
data collection items and processes, improving their ability to monitor
key program activities, evaluate client outcomes, and provide on-going
cost-effectiveness estimates. Findings from the evaluation were used by
CAMT staff in applications for funding and awards.

**Coordinated Children's Service Initiative Evaluation**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) conducted a mixed-methods
evaluation of the Coordinated Children's Service Initiative (CCSI). CCSI
began in the 1990s as a multi-agency approach to reduce out-of-home
placements of children with emotional disabilities by creating locally
coordinated systems of care.

CCSI was based on the belief that there had been an over-reliance on
out-of-home residential placements, the most restrictive and expensive
form of treatment. Instead, CCSI was designed to promote community-based
alternatives that support the care of children in families and
family-like settings.

Evaluation & Research

CHSR conducted on-site structured interviews with participants in eight
counties that implemented CCSI in its earliest stages. Additionally,
CHSR analyzed placement data from the child welfare, education, juvenile
justice, and mental health residential placement systems. CCSI counties
were compared with non-CCSI counties to examined changes in placements
over time, changes in placements by service system, and the potential
cost savings of averted placements. The study culminated in a report to
the [**[New York State Council on Children and
Families]{.underline}**](http://ccf.ny.gov/) that described CCSI's
strengths and challenges, provided some evidence that CCSI contributed
to declines in out-of-home placements for participating children, and
offered a series of recommendations to guide future practice.

**New York State Success**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) conducted an evaluation of
the New York State Success (NYS Success) project which was designed to
bring the [System of
Care](http://www.tapartnership.org/systemsOfCare.php/) approach to scale
across New York State through the provision of training and technical
assistance, with the goal of creating a sustainable service-delivery
infrastructure that incorporates System of Care values, principles, and
practices.

The project was a statewide System of Care expansion grant which began
in 2012 and was funded by the [**[Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration
(SAMHSA)]{.underline}**](http://www.samhsa.gov/). The purpose of the
project was to improve the behavioral health outcomes of children and
youth with serious emotional disturbances and their families.

Evaluation & Research

The evaluation conducted by CHSR consisted of the following key
components:

1.  **Federal Data Requirements (Infrastructure and Youth-Level Outcome
    Data):** To ensure compliance with federal mandates, CHSR collected
    quarterly surveys to assess infrastructure changes that occurred
    within the counties as a result of NYS Success. The survey collected
    such data as county policy changes; changes in the number of
    agencies and organizations collaborating, coordinating, and sharing
    resource; and changes in the number and percentage of youth and
    family members serving on workgroups, advisory groups, or councils.
    Individual youth-level data were collected at six-month intervals
    using an instrument designed to measure mental health symptoms,
    substance use, school functioning, and other outcomes of interest.

2.  **Process Studies and Formative Evaluations:**  CHSR conducted
    process studies and formative evaluations on topics of interest to
    NYS Success stakeholders to provide feedback to inform continuous
    quality improvement and development of new project initiatives. CHSR
    conducted one such formative evaluation on the implementation of
    Wraparound in New York State, an intensive care coordination process
    in children's mental health, to inform the design of a pilot
    project.

3.  **County-Specific Evaluation:** CHSR worked intensively in several
    counties on county-specific evaluation activities to inform their
    local System of Care efforts.

4.  **Wraparound Pilot Project:** CHSR designed and implemented an
    evaluation of the Wraparound pilot project, which consisted of
    process and outcomes studies designed to capture stakeholder
    perspectives on Wraparound training, coaching, and overall
    implementation, as well as fidelity to the Wraparound approach. The
    outcomes study was designed to assess early outcomes of Wraparound,
    using a pre-post, matched comparison design. Data sources included
    Medicaid claims data, juvenile detention placement data, and school
    data.

**Capital Area Poverty Reduction Initiative**

**(CAPRI)**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) worked with [**[CARES,
Inc.]{.underline}**](https://caresny.org/) to conduct an evaluation of
the Capital Area Poverty Reduction Initiative (CAPRI). This program was
funded by The City of Albany after receipt of a \$1.5 million [**[Empire
State Poverty Reduction
Initiative]{.underline}**](https://nyscommunityaction.org/nyscaa-public-policy/empire-state-poverty-reduction-initiative-and-community-action/) (ESPRI)
grant to develop a plan to reduce poverty in Albany.

A main focus of the grant was to increase employment among adults in
vulnerable populations residing in the City of Albany. The evaluation
included:

-   a review of secondary data sources to report on demographics and
    employment trends;

-   a literature and document review to identify best practices,
    available vocational assessment tools, and outcome measures;

-   development of a project-specific database;

-   interviews with local stakeholders; and

-   administration of electronic surveys to participants.

The project provided a data brief on demographics and needs, a data
brief on the local employment landscape, a report on best practices and
model programs, and a report summarizing participation and outcomes.

**MRT Supportive Housing Initiative**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) was awarded a grant by
the **[[New York State Department of Health](https://www.health.ny.gov/)
(NYSDOH)]{.underline}** to conduct an evaluation to assess the
implementation, impact, effectiveness and cost savings of a [**[Medicaid
Redesign Team (MRT) Supportive Housing
Initiative]{.underline}**](https://www.health.ny.gov/health_care/medicaid/redesign/supportive_housing_initiatives.htm).

NYSDOH launched the MRT Supportive Housing Initiative, a pilot program
to identify best practices, procedures and methods for supportive
housing providers to collaborate with Health Homes to identify and
locate homeless or unstably housed Health Home members and to provide
housing as a means to facilitate access to health services and improve
the health status of Health Home members.

Evaluation & Research

CHSR was contracted by NYSDOH to lead an evaluation team to evaluate and
report on the impact, effectiveness, and cost savings of the MRT
Supportive Housing initiative. The evaluation team consisted of CHSR,
the [**[Institute for Health Systems Evaluation (at the UAlbany School
of Public
Health)]{.underline}**](https://www.albany.edu/sph/institute-for-health-system-evaluation.php),
and [**[CARES, Inc.]{.underline}**](http://caresny.org/) The evaluation
included a process study, a cost study, and a study of quality-of-life
outcomes for program participants.

**The Wage Center Evaluation**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) performed an evaluation of
[**[The WAGE Center]{.underline}**](http://www.albanyhousing.org/) for
the **[[Albany Housing Authority](http://www.albanyhousing.org/)
(AHA)]{.underline}**.

The WAGE Center continued AHA's focus on the core services that
maximized the ability of residents to access opportunities that lead to
self-sufficiency and supplemented these core services with an array of
educational, training and support opportunities provided by other
partners. The program focused on AHA residents and Housing Choice
Voucher participants receiving Temporary Assistance to Needy Families
(TANF).

Evaluation & Research

The evaluation conducted by CHSR consisted of a process study and an
outcome study. The process study identified the numbers and
characteristics of the participant population and the nature of services
being provided. The outcome study investigated whether the programs
operating under the WAGE Center were achieving the goals of reducing
barriers to employment, developing participant self-sufficiency, and
increasing the employment of individuals being served.

**Albany County Equity Agenda**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) assisted [**[Albany
County]{.underline}**](http://www.albanycounty.com/) in developing an
Equity Agenda Strategic Plan to assist Albany County in developing a
county-wide equity agenda.

Evaluation & Research

CHSR gathered and analyzed county-wide data to identify areas of
inequity related to service provision and workforce representation.
Through a collaboration with Dr. Salome Raheim from the University at
Albany School of Social Welfare, CHSR provided training and technical
assistance to assist Albany County department leadership in defining
goals and strategies to address the underlying causes of inequities
within the county. The goal of this project was to develop a strategic
plan that would reduce barriers in service provision, facilitate the
creation of a more representative county workforce, and further identify
areas of focus.

Report

[**2020-2025 Equity Agenda Strategic Planning
Report**](https://www.albany.edu/chsr/reports/Albany%20County%20Equity%20Agenda%202019_Strategic%20Planning%20Full%20Report_Final.pdf)

**\
**

**SEED Program Evaluation**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) conducted an evaluation of
the Small Enterprise Economic Development (SEED) program.

The SEED program was a "character-based" lending program with the goal
of supporting and financing entrepreneurs who had been unable to obtain
the resources necessary to start or expand a small business through
traditional sources. The program operated as a partnership between
Empire State Development, the University at Albany, and the State
Employees Federal Credit Union (SEFCU). The program offered
entrepreneurs support and mentorship, as well as loans of up to \$35,000
that were approved using a character-based criteria system.

Evaluation & Research

CHSR focused on a formative evaluation approach that focused on
identification of process strengths and continuous improvement. CHSR
sought to examine how SEED impacted several stakeholders with potential
to benefit from the program: fledgling entrepreneurs, economic
developers, and lenders.

**Housing Needs of Grandfamilies**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) was awarded a contract by
the Division of Housing and Community Renewal to conduct a qualitative
study on housing in relation to grandparent and elderly relative
caregivers of children.

Evaluation & Research

The evaluation conducted by CHSR focused on contextualizing existing
state data on grandfamilies and housing cost, and to make connections
between identified needs in grandfamily housing and existing
infrastructures for affordable low-and moderate-income housing in New
York State. Evaluation activities included:

1.  a review of relevant applied research and scholarly literature on
    grandparents and grandfamily housing;

2.  interviews conducted with experienced program professionals at
    statewide, regional and/or local levels of New York State Office of
    Children and Family Services (OCFS), Office of Temporary and
    Disability Assistance (OTDA), and the State Office for the Aging
    (SOFA);

3.  interviews conducted with directors of local kinship care programs
    and coalitions across the state;

4.  administration of focus groups with children and grandparent and
    elderly relative caregivers reflecting diverse distribution of
    grandfamilies around the state; and

5.  generation of a report summarizing the findings and making
    recommendations derived from [**[these
    findings]{.underline}**](https://www.albany.edu/chsr/Publications/22NYS%20Grandfamilies%20Housing%20Study%20FINAL%20REPORT_Mar%2031%202015.pdf).

**Albany County Juvenile Justice Coordination and Research**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) worked with the [**[Albany
County Department for Children, Youth, and
Families]{.underline}**](http://www.albanycounty.com/cyf/) to provide
data collection and analysis for research centered furthering the goals
of the Juvenile Detention Alternatives Initiative (JDAI) through
community engagement and interagency collaboration..

JDAI began in Albany in 2013 and aimed to reduce juvenile detention
admissions and expand the array of local detention alternatives,
minimize re-arrest and failure to appear rates pending adjudication, and
reduce racial and ethnic disparities in juvenile detention.

Evaluation & Research

CHSR worked with local agencies to identify and utilize data in making
policy and case-level decisions and in developing strategies to improve
the local juvenile justice system. Data pertaining to juvenile justice
processes and alternatives to detention were collected, analyzed, and
presented to local stakeholders.

**Evaluation of the Summer Youth Employment Program**

The Center for Human Services Research partnered with the [City of
Albany\'s Learning, Initiative and Gaining Headway Together (LIGHT) to
develop surveys and analyze educational data for the Summer Youth
Employment Program
(SYEP)](https://www.albanyny.gov/Government/Departments/YouthandWorkforceServices/SummerYouthEmploymentProgram.aspx).

SYEP was designed to provide youth with a summer work experience as a
method for helping youth develop the skills and experience needed for
future employment.

Evaluation & Research

CHSR developed surveys for youth and employers participating in SYEP.
The surveys were designed to assess the utility of the program in
enhancing the educational and vocational development of youth.
Additionally, CHSR conducted an analyses of the educational outcomes of
youth participating in the SYEP.

Reports

[**Albany's Summer Youth Employment Program (SYEP) Improves Graduation
Rates Among At-Risk
Youth**](https://www.albany.edu/chsr/reports/syep_2019_researchbrief.pdf)

**[Evaluation of the City of Albany Summer Youth Employment
Program](https://www.albany.edu/chsr/reports/syep_2019.pdf)**

**Training Needs of Victime Service Providers**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) was contracted by
the [**New York State Office of Victim Services**](https://ovs.ny.gov/),
to conduct an assessment of the training needs of victim service
providers throughout New York State.

Evaluation & Research

CHSR conducted a needs assessment consisting of an online survey of
service providers and telephone interviews with key stakeholders to:

-   ascertain the basic skills that victim service providers needed to
    provide quality assistance, services, and support to victims and
    survivors of crime;

-   specify the types of training and topics needed to improve victim
    services;

-   identify specific modalities and delivery methods of training for
    victim service providers; and

-   determine the sustainability of training efforts over time.

Learn more about:

[**Office Of Victim Services: VAP Training
Center**](https://ovs.ny.gov/vap-training-center)

**Victim Legal Assistance Network Development**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) collaborated
with [**[Empire Justice Center
(EJC)]{.underline}**](http://www.empirejustice.org/), and [**[Pro Bono
Net (PBN)]{.underline}**](http://www.probono.net/), on the Victim Legal
Assistance Network Development, a grant funded by the New York State
Office of Victim Services.

This project was a continuation of a federal grant from the Department
of Justice, Office for Victims of Crime. The goal of the federally
funded project was to develop a comprehensive, collaborative network to
meet the civil legal needs of crime victims in New York State, outside
of New York City. This continuation sought to expand and enhance the
information and resources available on the [**[New York Crime Victims
Legal Help Network]{.underline}**](https://crimevictimshelpny.org/).

Evaluation & Research

CHSR conducted the following evaluation activities to inform the
development of the Legal Help Network:

-   an analysis of data on crime and victim services;

-   a review of existing programs and services across New York State;

-   a survey of victims and service providers; and

-   focus groups and interviews with crime victims, service providers,
    and civil legal attorneys.

CHSR then conducted a needs assessment of specific victim populations,
obtained feedback about how victims and service providers used the
Network, and analyzed data to inform modifications to the Network.

**Her Justice Evaluation**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) was contracted to serve as
the lead evaluator on a grant awarded to [**[Her
Justice]{.underline}**](http://www.herjustice.org/) from the [**[New
York Community Trust]{.underline}**](http://www.nycommunitytrust.org/).
The grant focused on determining the impact of services received on
legal and extra-legal outcomes of low-income women seeking free legal
services in family, divorce, and immigration law.

Evaluation & Research

CHSR measured the relative impact of legal services coordinated and
provided by Her Justice to low-income women in the areas of family,
divorce, and immigration law. The efficacy of Pro Se support and full
legal services were compared. The analysis considered their relative
impacts on both legal outcomes, such as custody decisions or child
support amounts, and non-legal outcomes such as subsequent employment
and satisfaction with the legal process.

Reports

**[New York Community Trust Access to Justice Project Final
Report](https://www.albany.edu/chsr/Publications/Her_Justice_NYCT_Final_Report.pdf)**

**Innovations in Victim Services**

**for Underserved Populations**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) was contracted by the New
York State Office of Victim Services (NYS OVS) to identify innovative
programs and practices that reach underserved crime victims. This work
was the first step in a larger project to enhance the provision of
services to underserved victims in New York State.

Evaluation & Research

The research conducted by CHSR focused on programs that had reached, or
could be adapted to increasing access to, the following underserved
populations:

-   young men of color,

-   transgender individuals,

-   the elderly, and

-   deaf/hard of hearing individuals.

These populations were identified as underserved (and in need of
services) in an earlier [**[needs
assessment]{.underline}**](https://www.albany.edu/chsr/Publications/Civil%20Legal%20Needs%20booklet%202017_pages.pdf) of
crime victims in New York State and after consultation with [**[NYS
OVS]{.underline}**](https://ovs.ny.gov/). CHSR conducted a literature
review of programs and practices, followed by interviews with
jurisdictions where innovations were implemented. A final report was
prepared that described the innovations and provided recommendations to
enhance the provision of services to underserved victims in New York
State.

**Rural Law Initiative Collaboration**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) contracted with the
Government Law Center at Albany Law School in a project to understand
the dearth of available legal services in rural areas. This project was
part of a collaboration between the [**[Government Law Center's Rural
Law
Initiative]{.underline}**](http://www.albanylaw.edu/centers/government-law-center) and [**[SUNY
Cobleskill's Institute for Rural
Vitality]{.underline}**](http://www.cobleskill.edu/institute/).

Evaluation & Research

CHSR designed, dissemination, and analyzed a multi-mode survey of
attorneys in rural New York to inform the current status of rural legal
practice.

**Re-Rentering the Albany Community**

**Through Treatment (REACT) Evaluation**

The Center for Human Services Research (CHSR) worked with
the **[[Addictions Care Center of Albany](http://theacca.net/)
(ACCA)]{.underline}** and other community providers to evaluate
Re-Entering the Albany Community through Treatment (REACT).

REACT, which was supported by the **[[Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration](https://www.samhsa.gov/)
(SAMHSA)]{.underline}**, provided education, case management, and
integrated treatment for the substance abusing offender population
reentering the community.

Evaluation & Research

The evaluation conducted by CHSR collected, analyzed, and reported on
data from structured interviews and client focus groups. The evaluation
provided data on project implementation; achievement of client and
program goals and objectives; adherence to treatment model fidelity; the
level of client satisfaction; and assessment of cultural competence,
quality assurance and regulatory controls.
